Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and
this is the lecture on Causality.
So what is causation?
And I start with this great xkcd comic.
If you don't read xkcd,
it's this wonderful web comic and
you should look it up.
And it says I used to think
correlation implied causation
then I took a 101 class and now I don't.
Sounds like the class helped and
it says, well, maybe.
And so, that's what we're gonna talk
about today is the well, maybe part.
So in order to define causality, I'm gonna
go back to the philosopher David Hume.
And his philosophy really underlies
was the starting point for
some of the thinking on causality in
the world of statistical analysis.
And I give you this quote here,
and it's somewhat of a mouthful.
But the fundamental idea for defining
a causal effect in statistics, or at least
one of the major branches of thinking
Is to think about counterfactuals.
So and this is what he describes and if
you look at the last sentence or in other
words where if the first object had not
been, the second never had existed.
He's talking about or we translate it
now to the idea of counterfactuals.
So as an example in the medical world of
a counterfactual, what we would talk about
is whether or not a person would respond
to the treatment with what we observed.
If we gave them the treatment and
they responded or not,
and then the counterfactual be
what would have happened for
that person if we had not
given them the treatment?
So the causal effect is the difference for
that person
whether they received the treatment or
whether they didn't receive the treatment.
Okay, but of course we only get to
see one of those two realities.
And so the counterfactual is the
difference between something we observe
and something we can't observe.
So again, just to reiterate,
that's what this slide says,
is the causal effect of the treatment on
a subject is the change in the outcome.
From the treatment that
the subject actually received, and
what would've occurred had she or
he received the other treatment.
Okay, so
that's the counterfactual difference.
And again,
it requires something we observed, but
also requires something we cannot observe.
So let's just go through an example and
consider a made up treatment.
And in this case I don't know why, I
decided let's pick an exercise treatment.
So I picked a silly one.
So this is in kind of a crazy
70s exercise equipment called the Twist 'N
Tone where you kinda twist on your hips.
Okay.
So let's imaging, so the causal,
the counter factual, right?
Would be the difference between what would
happen if a person used to twist and
tone, let's say for
12 weeks, vs they didn't.
Both of these, it's the same person and
by the way both of the persons in
these images are the same person.
It's Christian Bale from
two different roles.
Certainly the amount of weight loss he
went through in the right hand role was
a little excessive.
But the counterfactual difference would
be the difference in the outcome,
in this case the measure of fitness or
muscle density or whatever, comparing
whether or not the person had used it
to whether the person had not used it.
So we can observe that, right?
We can observe for
this specific point in time
a person who has both used the twist and
tone and not used the twist and tone.
We could do something like in Christian
Bale's case, look at it if he used it for
a while then had a washout period and
then he didn't use it for a while or
something like that, but again,
that's not at the same point in time.
So whatever effect we see
may be aliased with time.
So we can't actually get at
the causal effect for an individual.
However we can get at, we can estimate
at least, the average causal effect,
the average across individuals,
under some assumptions.
Okay, so the average causal effect
is not just if we look at whether or
not Christian Bale used the twist and
tone or not.
The average causal effect is
if we took a bunch of people,
some of them used twist and
tone and another collection of them
didn't they received the control and
the comparison between the two.
And if we have things like randomization,
that allows us,
under some assumptions, to estimate
the actual average causal effect.
So we can get a real idea of
cause completely empirically.
And that's the idea of causal
statistical inference.
To get at the idea of cause to understand
the assumptions you're making and
to have a formal definition of
cause underlying your analysis.
So this way of thinking,
there's some consequences.
One consequence is to talk about cause,
we have to think about an assignable
treatment or intervention, okay.
So in this case we can assign the twist
and tone to some people and not.
We have to conceptually,
even if we can't specifically,
even if we can't randomize it, like
smoking is something we can't randomize.
We can't tell people to go smoke, right?
That wouldn't be ethical.
However, it's conceptually randomizable.
I work in a setting, brain imagining,
we're often interested in cause.
In things that are not assignable.
For example, does this kind of
change in your brain structure
change your predilection for a particular
kind of neurological disorder?
And in that case,
we can't conceptually think about that
change actually being randomizable.
So that's one potential
problem with this specific
definition of causal statistical analysis
that I'm supporting here in this lecture.
Of course, the other is we
can't observe counterfactuals.
We only get to observe one state
of nature at a particular time.
And that's the crux of the work in causal
inference, is trying to combat that issue.
But we can with assumptions and careful
study design make inferences about average
causal effects and
that's where the real insight was.
And to me I think there's
formal causal analysis and
then there's Understanding
an enough of causal analysis so
that you can, you can think about
the causal implications of your analysis.
And so to me I don't know,
personally I don't know,
I don't do that much
specific causal analysis.
However, causal thinking
underlies a lot of what I'm doing.
So I think causal thinking is
essential for statistical analysis.
And it's essential for understanding
the causal implications of your analysis.
So what I'd like you to do is now to
think about these various study designs.
Now that you know this one simple fact,
we're gonna define cause as the difference
as a causal effect is the difference
between what we would observe on a person
if they had a treatment minus what they
would observe or over what they would
have observed had they not received the
treatment, where we only get to view one.
So what I'd like you to do is think about
these various kinds of study designs and
how they try to get out that question and
what ways they've failed and
in what ways they succeed.
So one really obvious example of trying
to think this way is a crossover trial.
Give a subject a treatment,
than after a suitable washout
period give them the other.
So as an example,
if you were studying chronic migraines.
We could give someone some relief
medication after a washout period,
then give them another.
So I think this might work for
migraines because,
chronic migraines people tend to continue
to have them after a washout period we can
assume that the drug isn't
carrying over to the next period.
But it wouldn't work for
something like an ad campaign, right?
Because you can't unsee the previous ad,
okay?
So, cross-over trials try to
get causal effects by virtue
of having the same person
actually receive both treatments.
Or, I'll give another example here,
a weight loss study.
You couldn't do this kind of thing for
But again, I want you to think
about crossover trials and
the implications with causal and
counterfactual thinking.